BETTERCP/M BASELINE PLATFORM SPECIFICATION

Draft 0.1

1. PURPOSE AND SCOPE

The BetterCP/M Baseline Platform Specification defines the initial
machine environment used to develop, test, and bring up BetterCP/M.

The baseline platform is a development target, not a definition of the
hardware on which BetterCP/M may ultimately run. Machine-specific
facilities described here shall remain behind the appropriate hardware-
abstraction boundaries so that they do not become accidental
requirements of the operating system as a whole.

This specification records the cpmsim machine interface required by
BetterCP/M and the development facilities adopted for the initial
implementation. It does not define CP/M-compatible system services,
file-system behavior, command processing, or other operating-system
facilities supplied by BetterCP/M itself.

2. BASELINE PLATFORM

2.1 z80pack cpmsim

The initial BetterCP/M development platform shall be z80pack cpmsim.

cpmsim provides a Z80 execution environment with memory, console I/O,
raw disk I/O, interrupt facilities, and a simple boot mechanism. It does
not provide the CP/M operating-system environment unless optional
host-service facilities are deliberately invoked.

BetterCP/M shall own its boot process, hardware abstraction, system
services, file system, command environment, program execution, and other
operating-system behavior.

2.2 Pinned Reference Version

The reference version for initial BetterCP/M development is:

z80pack Release 1.39 Repository revision:
91fd28eb04e675c2127df88ed3f40675e15282e2 Revision date: 2025-06-17

The pinned revision establishes a reproducible reference machine. Later
z80pack revisions may be evaluated and adopted deliberately, but changes
in emulator behavior shall not silently redefine the BetterCP/M baseline
platform.

2.3 Role of the Baseline Platform

cpmsim is selected because its machine interface is small, observable,
scriptable, and sufficient for bare-metal operating-system development.

The simplicity of cpmsim is a development advantage. It shall not be
taken as evidence that historical or future BetterCP/M targets will
provide equally simple hardware.

The baseline platform shall therefore be treated as the first concrete
implementation of the BetterCP/M hardware boundary, not as the hardware
architecture of BetterCP/M itself.

3. PROCESSOR ENVIRONMENT

3.1 Processor

The baseline processor is the Zilog Z80 as emulated by z80pack.

Initial validation exercised alternate registers, IX and IY indexed
operations, block operations, relevant arithmetic flags, HALT,
interrupt-mode instructions, and maskable interrupt delivery.

This validation does not constitute exhaustive certification of every
Z80 instruction, undocumented behavior, flag side effect, or timing
characteristic.

3.2 Initial Processor State

BetterCP/M shall not depend upon arbitrary register values present when
the boot record begins execution.

Startup code shall explicitly initialize all processor state upon which
it depends, including the stack pointer before stack operations are
used.

3.3 Interrupt Facilities

cpmsim supports Z80 maskable interrupts.

A host timer controlled through I/O port 27 can provide a periodic
maskable interrupt. Initial validation demonstrated delivery of such an
interrupt to an IM 1 handler at address 0038h.

Use of the cpmsim timer is optional. Its existence, frequency, and
control mechanism are machine-specific and shall not become general
BetterCP/M architectural requirements.

4. MEMORY ENVIRONMENT

4.1 Address Space

The baseline machine provides the Z80 16-bit address space from 0000h
through FFFFh.

The initial BetterCP/M implementation shall operate within this
64-kilobyte address space.

4.2 Initial Memory State

The cpmsim development invocation may use the -m 00 option to initialize
memory deterministically to zero for testing.

This is a development convenience only. BetterCP/M shall not require RAM
other than explicitly loaded boot contents to contain any particular
value at startup.

4.3 Memory Ownership

Apart from the boot record supplied by the platform, BetterCP/M is
responsible for defining and managing its own memory layout.

The final placement of resident operating-system components, command
environment, buffers, system state, and Transient Program Area is not
defined by this platform specification.

5. BOOT INTERFACE

5.1 Boot Disk

Normal cpmsim disk boot uses the file drivea.dsk as drive A.

The baseline BetterCP/M development environment shall use separate test
and development disk images rather than modifying unrelated or reference
CP/M disk images.

5.2 Boot Record

On normal disk boot, cpmsim reads exactly 128 bytes from the beginning
of drivea.dsk.

These 128 bytes constitute the baseline platform boot record.

5.3 Initial Load Address

cpmsim copies the boot record into memory addresses 0000h through 007Fh.
Execution begins at address 0000h.

The BetterCP/M boot record therefore owns execution from 0000h and is
responsible for establishing the processor state required to continue
system startup.

5.4 Stage-Zero Loader

The initial boot record may contain a stage-zero loader that uses the
machine-specific raw disk interface to load additional BetterCP/M code.

The 128-byte boot-record limit is a cpmsim boot-interface constraint. It
shall not be generalized into a requirement that all BetterCP/M
platforms use 128-byte boot records or begin execution at address 0000h.

6. CONSOLE INTERFACE

6.1 Console Status

I/O port 0 provides console input status.

The cpmsim-specific console implementation may poll this port to
determine whether input is available.

6.2 Console Data

I/O port 1 provides console data.

Bare-metal BetterCP/M code may use this port for console input and
output through the cpmsim hardware-abstraction implementation.

6.3 Portability Boundary

The use of ports 0 and 1 is specific to cpmsim.

Higher BetterCP/M components shall obtain console services through the
appropriate hardware-abstraction interface and shall not depend directly
upon these port numbers.

7. STORAGE INTERFACE

7.1 General Model

cpmsim provides a simple raw-sector disk interface.

The interface operates on 128-byte sectors and uses explicit drive,
track, sector, DMA-address, command, and status registers.

This interface is machine-specific. BetterCP/M logical disk formats,
file-system structures, allocation policies, and CP/M-compatible disk
behavior shall not be defined in terms of cpmsim’s controller
implementation.

7.2 Disk Ports

The baseline cpmsim disk interface uses:

Port 10 Drive selection Port 11 Track selection Port 12 Sector number,
low byte Port 13 Disk command Port 14 Disk status Port 15 DMA address,
low byte Port 16 DMA address, high byte Port 17 Sector number, high byte

For port 13:

0 Read sector 1 Write sector

7.3 Sector Transfer

A disk operation transfers one 128-byte sector between the selected disk
sector and the memory address specified by the DMA registers.

The DMA mechanism is a cpmsim hardware characteristic. BetterCP/M shall
not require other hardware targets to provide DMA or to expose storage
through the same programming model.

7.4 Baseline Drive Geometry

The validated drive-A geometry is:

Tracks: 77 Sectors per track: 26 Sector size: 128 bytes Image size:
256256 bytes

For this geometry, cpmsim maps a selected track and sector to the raw
image according to:

((track * sectors_per_track) + sector - 1) * 128

Initial validation independently confirmed this mapping for tested
sectors.

The physical image geometry described here does not by itself define the
BetterCP/M logical file-system format to be placed on the disk.

7.5 Storage Portability Rule

The idealized cpmsim disk device shall not become the BetterCP/M storage
abstraction.

In particular, higher operating-system components shall not assume that
other storage devices:

-   transfer exactly one 128-byte sector per operation;
-   provide synchronous completion;
-   use DMA into arbitrary memory;
-   expose drive, track, and sector registers;
-   lack controller timing or state constraints; or
-   share cpmsim’s error and status behavior.

Such assumptions shall remain confined to the cpmsim-specific hardware
implementation.

8. DEVELOPMENT AND DIAGNOSTIC FACILITIES

8.1 ICE Debug Build

BetterCP/M development shall maintain a reproducible ICE-enabled cpmsim
debug build.

The validated debug configuration enables:

WANT_ICE WANT_TIM HISIZE 256 SBSIZE 16 WANT_HB

The validated build command is:

make DEBUG=1 build

ICE provides facilities useful for early BetterCP/M diagnosis, including
processor-register inspection, memory inspection, disassembly,
stepping/tracing, and instruction history.

BetterCP/M shall not depend at runtime upon ICE or any other emulator
debugging facility.

8.2 Controlled Test Termination

cpmsim I/O port 160 is a locked hardware-control port.

Writing AAh unlocks the port. A following control value with bit 7 set
requests a controlled emulator halt.

BetterCP/M production behavior shall not depend upon this facility. It
may be used by machine-specific development and conformance tests to
terminate a test run predictably.

8.3 Timer

I/O port 27 controls a 10-millisecond host timer capable of generating a
pending maskable Z80 interrupt.

This timer may be used for development or for cpmsim-specific
experimentation. It is not part of the portable BetterCP/M hardware
contract.

8.4 Automated Test Runner

Direct cpmsim process exit status is not a reliable indication of guest
test success or failure. Both successful guest termination and
deliberately induced guest failure may return host status zero.

Automated BetterCP/M testing shall therefore use an external
pseudo-terminal runner capable of:

-   recognizing guest test records;
-   injecting console input;
-   enforcing a deadline;
-   capturing and retaining the session transcript;
-   distinguishing PASS, FAIL, and timeout; and
-   returning a corresponding host process status.

A PTY/Expect runner has been validated for this purpose on the initial
macOS development environment.

Automated guest tests should emit distinctive, line-oriented,
machine-readable records, for example:

BCPM-TEST:PASS: BCPM-TEST:FAIL:

The runner shall explicitly terminate and reap cpmsim when a timeout
occurs.

8.5 Debug and Release Configurations

The ICE-enabled build is a development configuration.

BetterCP/M shall also be tested periodically with an ordinary non-ICE
cpmsim build so that emulator diagnostic facilities do not become hidden
runtime dependencies.

9. PLATFORM-SPECIFIC AND OPTIONAL FACILITIES

9.1 Machine-Specific Boundary

Direct use of cpmsim ports, boot-record conventions, disk DMA,
hardware-control facilities, and timer controls shall be confined to
machine-specific BetterCP/M code or development tooling.

Portable system components shall depend upon BetterCP/M-defined
interfaces rather than cpmsim implementation details.

9.2 Optional Host Services

cpmsim provides optional host BDOS/file conveniences through I/O port
161.

The baseline BetterCP/M implementation shall not use these facilities to
provide operating-system functionality that BetterCP/M is intended to
implement itself.

Use of such host conveniences during baseline boot, storage,
file-system, system-service, or program-execution implementation would
invalidate the intended bare-metal development boundary.

9.3 Emulator Modifications

The baseline does not require a private BetterCP/M fork of cpmsim.

Development tooling should prefer external automation and documented
machine facilities where practical.

If a future emulator modification would materially improve testing or
diagnosis, it shall be considered explicitly rather than introduced
silently as a dependency of BetterCP/M.

10. PORTABILITY AND VALIDATION

10.1 Development Platform Versus Target Architecture

cpmsim is the initial BetterCP/M development platform, not the
definition of a universal BetterCP/M machine.

The architecture shall remain capable of supporting machine-specific
implementations for substantially different Z80 systems.

10.2 Historical-Hardware Assumptions

cpmsim intentionally provides a simple and idealized development
environment. It does not expose many characteristics of historical
hardware, including controller timing, boot-ROM behavior, complex device
state, media peculiarities, and other machine-specific constraints.

Successful operation under cpmsim therefore establishes baseline
functionality but does not by itself establish hardware portability.

10.3 Later Validation

After the baseline system and hardware boundary are sufficiently
developed, BetterCP/M should be ported to one or more substantially
different emulated machines.

High-fidelity historical-machine emulation may then be used to expose
assumptions hidden by cpmsim’s simplicity. Community testing on physical
hardware may later provide additional validation.

The purpose of these later ports is not merely to increase the number of
supported machines. They shall test whether the BetterCP/M
hardware-abstraction boundaries are genuine.

11. REFERENCE DEVELOPMENT CONFIGURATION

The initial reference development configuration is:

Platform: z80pack cpmsim z80pack release: 1.39 Repository revision:
91fd28eb04e675c2127df88ed3f40675e15282e2 Processor: Z80 Address space:
64K Boot source: drive A raw image Boot record: 128 bytes Boot address:
0000h Console: cpmsim ports 0 and 1 Disk interface: cpmsim ports 10
through 17 Baseline geometry: 77 tracks, 26 sectors/track, 128
bytes/sector Debug environment: ICE-enabled cpmsim build Test
automation: PTY/Expect runner Host environment: macOS

This configuration establishes the reproducible starting point for
BetterCP/M implementation. Changes to the reference configuration shall
be deliberate and documented.

12. STATUS OF THE BASELINE

The cpmsim baseline has been validated by bare-metal experiments
demonstrating:

-   execution from the normal 128-byte disk boot record;
-   direct console output without CP/M services;
-   raw disk read, write, reread, and host-image verification;
-   useful ICE diagnosis of a deliberately induced failure;
-   automated prompt recognition, input injection, timeout handling,
    transcript capture, and host PASS/FAIL status;
-   representative documented Z80 instruction facilities;
-   HALT behavior; and
-   delivery of a real maskable interrupt to an IM 1 handler.

The platform is therefore accepted as suitable for initial BetterCP/M
development subject to maintaining the required external test runner and
reproducible ICE-enabled debug build.

This acceptance does not imply that cpmsim behavior is itself a
BetterCP/M compatibility requirement. CP/M compatibility remains an
operating-system requirement defined independently of the baseline
development machine.
