BETTERCP/M NAMED DIRECTORY REGISTER

Status: reconciled design baseline; implementation pending.


1. PURPOSE AND CANONICAL IDENTITY

A named directory is an alias for a canonical drive/user pair (DU).  It does
not replace or extend the CP/M filesystem.  For example, ROOT may name A0 and
GAMES may name C0.  Resolution produces an ordinary DU before normal command,
filename, or search processing continues.

Names contain one through eight letters or digits and are folded to upper case.
The normal lookup is NAME to DU.  Reverse DU-to-NAME lookup supports display,
inquiry, and the command prompt.

Canonical DU syntax retains its ordinary meaning.  Tokens A: through P: and
A0: through P31: are therefore reserved and may not be shadowed by aliases.
This preserves the project's compatibility rule that an extension must not
change the meaning of existing drive and numeric-DU forms.


2. LIVE REGISTER, OWNERSHIP AND PERSISTENCE

The authoritative live Named Directory Register belongs to NDR.RSX, including
both resolver code and the live mapping data. NDR is an optional command-
environment feature, so installations which do not load it pay no permanent
storage cost. The RSX survives transient execution, CCP/CPX reconstruction and
ordinary warm boot while installed. Explicit unload removes the feature and
discards the live register; a saved NDR file may restore it after reload.

NDR.RSX publishes a versioned callable resident service through the registry
defined by the PDS architecture. The CCP, RCP commands, transient utilities,
module loader, PATH and future applications call this common service rather
than implement private parsers or maps. Clients rediscover the service after
resident reconstruction and tolerate its absence. NDR data does not consume a
PDS allocation unless a future requirement explicitly says it must outlive the
NDR module itself.


3. COMMAND AND FILE USE

A recognized name followed by a colon is accepted wherever BetterCP/M accepts
a DU-qualified operand.  Examples include:

  ROOT:
  TYPE GAMES:README.TXT
  PIP UTILS:=ROOT:FOO.COM

Changing directory through ROOT: or through its canonical A0: produces the
same current DU.  When a current DU has a preferred name, the named-directory
aware prompt is:

  [A0:] ROOT>

The displayed name describes the current DU, not the spelling used to reach
it.  Prompt customization remains a separate lower-priority facility.


4. MANAGEMENT

The common management syntax is:

  ND                 list assignments
  ND A0:=ROOT         assign ROOT to A0
  ND A0:=             remove the preferred name for A0
  ND A0:              report the name for A0
  ND ROOT:            report the DU for ROOT

Names are unique.  Assigning an existing name elsewhere reports "ROOT exists"
and changes nothing; reassignment requires an explicit removal first.

The management front end need not be permanent core code. NDR.COM provides the
transient implementation. A future optional NDR.CPX may provide the same ND
commands without disk loading. Both use NDR.RSX, so unloading the CPX never
removes the namespace while NDR.RSX remains installed.


5. NDR FILES

Files such as STANDARD.NDR, DEVLPMNT.NDR, and GAMES.NDR are saved namespace
sets.  They are bulk load/save media, not the runtime database, and therefore
do not cause repeated floppy access during command lookup.  Definitions made
interactively or by SUBMIT also survive warm boot without an NDR file.

The human interchange form is one name and DU per line.  A compact binary form
may be added for fast loading, but its version, checksum, replacement/merge
semantics, and failure atomicity must be specified before implementation.


6. STORAGE REPRESENTATION

The legal 36-character alphabet permits six-bit packing: eight characters fit
in six bytes.  Drive A-P and user 0-31 require nine bits, so a fixed maximum
entry fits in eight bytes and a 128-byte allocation holds exactly 16 entries.

Variable-length packed entries could hold more short names in the same space,
but make mutation, validation, corruption recovery, and lookup more complex.
This remains an implementation choice.  Before freezing the DATA ABI, compare
fixed eight-byte entries, a compacted variable stream, and a fixed index plus
packed-name pool.  The selected capacity must be explicit, measurable, and
configurable if the memory trade-off warrants it.  Disk encoding need not be
identical to the live representation.


7. SECURITY BOUNDARY

Named directories carry no passwords or access policy.  Protection attaches
to the canonical DU, so it cannot be bypassed by renaming or deleting an alias.

The proposed DU-protection bitmap, administrator credential, wheel byte,
SECURITY.RSX, and fail-closed BDOS enforcement hook form a separate post-1.0
security design.  They must receive their own threat model and interface
specification before implementation.  None is required to implement the NDR,
and the NDR format reserves no security fields.
