BETTERCP/M CLOCK PROVIDER ABI
============================

Status: adopted BetterCP/M 1.0 design.  The current callable TIME service is a
provisional implementation; Stage 6 migrates the providers and TIME.COM to the
Functions 200/201 interface defined here.


1. PURPOSE AND LAYERING
-----------------------

BetterCP/M exposes one standard clock ABI while keeping hardware knowledge and
human presentation outside BDOS.  The layers are:

  public ABI       Functions 200/201 and the five-byte clock record
  provider RSX     operation, validation, status and hardware translation
  hardware         physical or emulated clock representation
  TIME.COM         parsing, formatting, help and human-readable errors

BDOS supplies only the unhandled-call fallback.  It does not locate a provider,
inspect a record, convert a date, access hardware or print a message.

This is a general hardware-independent BetterCP/M service, not a P2DOS
emulation facility.  It adopts P2DOS Functions 200/201 and the five-byte record
because they are compact, adequate and historically established without
constraining the underlying clock.  P2DOS clock-call compatibility is a useful
property of the standard interface rather than its primary design objective.


2. PUBLIC FUNCTIONS AND CLOCK RECORD
------------------------------------

The hardware-independent public calls use the P2DOS convention:

  C  = 200   GET TIME
  DE = address of a writable five-byte record

  C  = 201   SET TIME
  DE = address of a five-byte record

Both use this record:

  +0  byte  little-endian day-count low byte
  +1  byte  little-endian day-count high byte
  +2  byte  packed-BCD hour, 00h through 23h
  +3  byte  packed-BCD minute, 00h through 59h
  +4  byte  packed-BCD second, 00h through 59h

Day 1 is 1 January 1978 and day 65535 is 5 June 2157.  A conforming provider
uses the same representation for GET and SET.  GET publishes the record only
after obtaining and validating one coherent sample.  SET validates the complete
record before changing the clock.

The record represents the machine's ordinary local civil time.  Version 1.0
defines no timezone, daylight-saving, subsecond, alarm, scheduler or network-
synchronization model.

This record is the BetterCP/M provider interchange representation as well as a
historically deployed compatibility convention.  A competing native datetime
structure shall not be introduced without a demonstrated requirement.


3. BDOS FALLBACK
----------------

If no earlier RSX handles Function 200 or 201, the call reaches BDOS.  BDOS
mechanically returns 0FFh for either selector.  The public ABI defines that
value as UNAVAILABLE because reaching BDOS means no provider handled the call.

Conceptually the two selectors share:

        LD      A,0FFH
        RET

The actual unified dispatcher shall use its normal public-return path,
including its register aliasing and stack restoration.  The conceptual
three-byte body is not a license to bypass those rules and is not itself an ABI
requirement.

BDOS does not distinguish an absent provider from any other reason the call was
not intercepted.  It attaches no internal state or policy to the result.


4. STATUS CONTRACT
------------------

The public ABI needs these semantic results:

  SUCCESS
  UNAVAILABLE
  SET_UNSUPPORTED
  OPERATION_FAILED

UNAVAILABLE is 0FFh.  The numeric values and exact return-register behavior for
the other results shall not be frozen until P2DOS Function 200/201 success and
return behavior has been checked against source or executable evidence.  The
extension must preserve successful historical callers; it must not assign a
status convention which changes an observable P2DOS success result.

Version 1.0 defines no more than these four public outcomes.  If P2DOS leaves a
convenient return register unconstrained, BetterCP/M uses that register for the
minimal convention.  Detailed validation, hardware and provider errors collapse
to OPERATION_FAILED rather than creating a public error taxonomy.

A provider owns the status of every operation it intercepts.  A hardware read
failure returns OPERATION_FAILED directly.  A read-only provider intercepts SET
and returns SET_UNSUPPORTED; it does not chain to BDOS and turn the condition
into UNAVAILABLE.  Additional statuses require demonstrated implementation
need.


5. PROVIDER RSX CONTRACT
------------------------

A conforming provider is a BRSX-v2 module which advertises and intercepts both
numeric services 200 and 201.  It returns directly after handling either call
and chains every unrelated selector unchanged to the next RSX or fixed system.

GET reads the authoritative clock, converts its hardware representation, and
writes the standard record.  SET consumes that record and programs the clock
when supported.  Provider errors are machine-readable; user-interface text does
not belong in the RSX.

BetterCP/M 1.0 permits zero or one active conforming provider.  Reconstruction
validation rejects a prospective profile containing more than one provider of
either selector or a clock provider which advertises only one member of the
pair.  No provider priority, fallback, selection or arbitration is defined.

The current BRSX-v2 callable `TIME` advertisement and Function-208 discovery
path are provisional clock implementations, not a second stable clock ABI.
Stage 6 removes that dependency from standard clock clients.  The general
resident-service registry remains available to unrelated callable services.


6. HARDWARE BOUNDARY AND PROVIDERS
----------------------------------

Hardware may use BCD calendar registers, binary fields, an epoch counter,
emulator host-time services or another representation.  The provider absorbs
that difference and presents only the standard five-byte record upward.

`FREHDCLK.RSX` uses the FreHD extended-command interface and therefore serves
real FreHD hardware and trs80gp's FreHD emulation.  `ZPRTC.RSX` uses z80pack
cpmsim command port 25 and data port 26.  The z80pack clock already supplies a
CP/M-epoch day count and supports BCD or binary fields; the provider observes
the configured mode without changing shared emulator state.  The emulator's
leap calculation is not Gregorian-correct for 2100, so the initial provider
documents validity through 2099 unless it supplies corrective handling.

Each provider obtains a coherent sample using a hardware latch, atomic native
operation or bounded read/re-read strategy.  It does not fabricate a plausible
time after an unavailable, invalid or torn hardware sample.  The current FreHD
and z80pack providers may remain read-only for 1.0.


7. TIME.COM
-----------

TIME.COM calls Function 200 to display the clock and Function 201 to set it.
It owns command syntax, input parsing, calendar conversion, formatting, help
and human-readable errors.  All accepted input forms produce the same five-byte
record before SET; command syntax does not alter BDOS or provider semantics.

The minimum 1.0 interface is:

  TIME             display the current local date and time
  TIME /PROVIDER   identify the installed provider when discoverable

The exact SET command syntax is fixed with the utility specification rather
than this provider ABI.  TIME.COM renders UNAVAILABLE as a missing service,
SET_UNSUPPORTED as a read-only clock, and OPERATION_FAILED as a provider or
hardware failure.  Other applications may present the same statuses
differently.


8. P2DOS.MAC REFERENCE PROVIDER
-------------------------------

BetterCP/M 1.0 shall ship `P2DOS.MAC` as the standard provider source and
porting template.  Its common body owns the BRSX metadata, Functions 200/201
interception, unrelated-call chaining, the five-byte record, validation and
standard status behavior.

Hardware support is supplied as a source include selected from the BetterCP/M
clock library.  `P2DOS.MAC` includes one stable `CLKHW.INC` interface.  The
build selects a library implementation, for example `CLKFREHD.INC` or
`CLKZ80PK.INC`, and makes it available under that stable include name.  This
keeps the common provider source identical across platforms and preserves a
native CP/M assembly path with 8.3 filenames.

The include contract supplies:

  * a provider identity and capability declaration;
  * a GET routine which obtains one coherent hardware sample and converts it
    to the standard five-byte record;
  * an optional SET routine which consumes that record and converts it to the
    hardware representation; and
  * the small internal results needed by the common provider: success,
    unsupported SET and operation failure.

The include does not intercept BDOS functions, chain RSXs, print messages or
define public status numbers.  Those responsibilities remain in `P2DOS.MAC`.
The exact entry labels, register preservation and scratch ownership are a
source-level porting contract fixed with the Stage-6 implementation; they are
not a separately linked runtime ABI.

A hardware implementor normally adds one conforming `CLK*.INC` module and uses
the common source to build a hardware-named RSX.  `P2DOS.MAC` is a reference
implementation of the standard interface, not the definition of the ABI and
not an installable provider without a selected hardware include.

A provider may instead be written independently when it conforms to this
document.  Common source is encouraged where it reduces code without obscuring
the hardware contract.


9. COMPATIBILITY AND DEFERRED WORK
----------------------------------

The general BetterCP/M clock interface consequently provides P2DOS public
clock-call compatibility.  It does not claim general P2DOS emulation or P2DOS
filesystem timestamps.

Adapters for CP/M Plus, DOS+/Z80DOS, ZSDOS/ZDDOS, DateStamper and other useful
historical interfaces are later 1.x work.  They should reuse this provider
boundary rather than introduce separate hardware drivers.

The RSX architecture does not prohibit another clock scheme.  A provider or
adapter may expose a different historical or experimental interface through its
own correctly allocated selectors and record format.  It shall chain 200/201
unless it also supplies the standard BetterCP/M service, and it shall never
assign incompatible meanings to 200/201.  BetterCP/M 1.0 qualifies only the
standard interface.

Filesystem timestamps remain separate because they affect directory layouts,
file-operation semantics, copying, utilities, host tools and cpmtools
interoperability.  Clock calls alone do not reopen that work for 1.0.


10. QUALIFICATION
-----------------

Acceptance covers:

  * exact P2DOS-compatible entry and successful-return behavior;
  * 0FFh from unhandled Functions 200 and 201;
  * zero-provider and exactly-one-provider profiles;
  * rejection of duplicate or partial providers before publication;
  * known dates, BCD validation, range limits and coherent midnight sampling;
  * read-only SET, invalid input and hardware-failure behavior;
  * provider load, unload, movement, WBOOT and rediscovery;
  * unchanged unrelated hardware or emulator state; and
  * one TIME.COM binary working unchanged with every qualified provider.

The status numbers and register convention are a design-closure gate for Stage
6.  They must be resolved before the provider adaptation is considered
complete.
